Three forms of mathematics are widely used in Data Science. To begin with, Linear Algebra is a fantastic skill to have. Any Data Scientist can benefit from statistics as well. The last thing to keep in mind is that these computations must be done on a computer. That means you'll need to know not only mathematics but also computers and how to program mathematics on them. You should know which institute best teaches these topics now that you know the basic mathematical foundations for data science. When it comes to excellent data science learning and training, Learnbay, Udemy, and Coursera are at the top of the list, with live lectures and simple teacher-student connections.

The following is a list of the most typical mathematical requirements in the field of Data Science:

1.Statistics and Probability:

Data Science is built on the foundations of probability and statistics. When it comes to creating predictions, probability theory is quite useful. Data science relies heavily on estimates and projections. We produce estimations for further examination with the use of statistical approaches. As a result, statistical approaches are heavily reliant on probability theory. And data is the foundation of all probability and statistics.

The following are some of the subjects you should be familiar with:

Mean
Median
Mode
Standard deviation/variance
Correlation coefficient and the covariance matrix
Probability distributions (Binomial, Poisson, Normal), etc.

2. Linear Algebra:

This is a necessary field of mathematics for comprehending how machine-learning algorithms generate insight from a stream of data. Matrix algebra is used in anything from Facebook friend suggestions to Spotify song recommendations to turning your photo into a Salvador Dali-style painting utilizing deep transfer learning.

The following are the subjects you should be familiar with:

Vectors; Norm of a vector
Matrices; Transpose of a matrix
The inverse of a matrix
The determinant of a matrix
Trace of a Matrix
Dot product, etc.

3. Calculus for Data Science:

It's hidden behind the seemingly straightforward mathematical solution of a basic least squares issue in linear regression, or in every back-propagation, your neural network does to learn a new pattern. Adding it to your skillset is incredibly beneficial.

The following are the subjects you should be familiar with:

Functions of several variables
Derivatives and gradients
Step function
Sigmoid function
Logit function
ReLU (Rectified Linear Unit) function, etc.

4. Computational/Discrete Mathematics:

Many of the statistical and mathematical procedures required in Data Science are usually already assembled into a popular package. This is why Data Scientists make extensive use of dependencies. As a result, being able to manage virtual environments and dependencies is a very valued talent. Keeping this in mind, it's important to note that, while you may be anxious to conduct more complicated statistics, you may not always require the formulae.

The following are the subjects you should be familiar with:

Cost function/Objective function
Likelihood function
Error function
Gradient Descent Algorithm and its variants (e.g. Stochastic Gradient Descent Algorithm)





FOR ML NEEDED MATHEMATICS:::::


For probability and statistics: Book by Stark and Woods 'Probability and Random Processes with Applications to Signal Processing'

For information theory: Book by Thomas and Cover 'Elements of Information Theory'

For linear algebra, apart from many great books such as 'Matrix Analysis' by 'Horn and Johnson', I would also recommend Gilbert Strang's video lectures on linear algebra (courtesy of OCW-MIT).



Instead of asking just WHAT, I think it is also important to know WHY.

WHAT: Linear Algebra WHY: most of the machine learning that we do, deals with scalars and vectors and matrices -- vectors of features, matrices of weights etc. You do vector matrix multiplication like say in logistic regression, neural networks... Or you do matrix transpose first and then multiplication (for say in error back propagation in neural networks). Sometimes you need to do clustering of input, maybe using spectral clustering techniques, which requires you to know what eigen values are, eigen vectors are.. Sometimes you need to take inverses of matrices, say in computing inverse of covariance matrix for fitting a Gaussian distribution. So you now know WHY you need Linear Algebra.

WHAT: Optimization Theory WHY: How do you train the weights of your model so that the training error is minimized ? Answer: optimization. You may need to know how to take derivatives of loss function with respect to some parameter so that you can carry out gradient descent optimization. You may need to know what gradients mean. What are hessians if you are doing second order optimization like LBFGS. You may need to learn what Newton steps are, maybe to solve line searches. You will need to understand functional derivatives to better understand Gradient Boosted Decision Trees. You will need to understand convergence properties of various optimization methods to get an idea of how fast or slow your algorithm will run.

WHAT: Probability and Statistics WHY: When you are doing machine learning, you are primarily after some kind of distribution. What is the probability of an output given my input ? Why do I need this ? When your machine learning model predicts (assigns probabilities) high enough to known observation, you know you have a good model at hand. Its a goodness criteria. Statistics help you to count well, normalize well, obtain distributions, find out the mean of your input feature, its standard deviation. Why do you need these things ? You need means and variances to better normalize your input data before you feed it into you machine learning system. This helps in faster convergence (optimization theory concept).

WHAT: Signal Processing WHY: You usually do not feed raw input to your machine learning systems. You do some kind of pre processing. For instance you would like to extract some features from the input speech signal, or an image. Now, extracting these features needs you to know properties of these underlying signals. Digital signal processing or Image processing will help you gain expertise. You would be in a better situation to know what feature extraction works and what does not. You would want to learn what is a Fourier transform because maybe you would like to apply that to speech signal or maybe apply discrete cosine transform to images before using them as features to your machine learning system.